When you record data from an experiment, often you will need to be
able to interpret your results later. Part of the key to this is good
lab notebook keeping technique, in terms of recording all the
information you are likely to need. Another important component is
significantly understanding your prediction before you begin making
measurements, so you don't waste too much time making irrelevant
measurements or producing data which doesn't test the idea you were
trying to test. Exploring variations on the suggested procedure will
help you refine your prediction, develop a procedure to test it, and
figure out which information is essential to record so that you can
make sense of your measurement records later. Spending a small amount
of time analyzing the data after you leave lab, regardless of whether
or not you do a lab report, would be helpful in understanding the
material in greater depth. One important component of understanding
how to interpret your data is understanding how the measurements you
make relate to the concept you are trying to measure. Another
important piece of this issue is finding a way to handle variations in
measurements which are fundamentally random, may as well be random
because we lack sufficient information, or random due to the way the
measurement was made. Understanding uncertainty, or error, in
measurements will help you understand these issues and help you test
your hypotheses in future labs.

Equipment:
two wood blocks
ruler

Procedure:

One of the difficulties in physics is establishing what is being
measured. Measure the length of a block, but vary the procedure in
several different ways. Make at least 15 measurements. Record your
procedure and associated measurements in your lab notebook. Does it
matter if you use different sides? How about exchanging rulers with
someone else in the lab? What else effects it?

How precisely did you record your measurements? Did you see any
variations in the results to that precision? 

Use your data to obtain the length of the block by taking the mean of
your measurements. Rejecting data points is a subtle issue, though
there are a number of different reasons this is sometimes done. One
commonly used case includes measurements where you remember something
interfering with the purpose of the measurement, such as a cart which
veers too far off course for a finish line to be established in a
measurement of timing a cart. Other cases include things like actual
mistakes you remember making in the intended proceedure of the
experiment that you don't think you can correct for later or data
which is too fundamentally different from the rest to be interpretable
based on something about how it was measured. Other reasons exist as
well. Do you have any that you want to discard? Use the average
deviation method in Appendix B to find the uncertainty or error of
your measurement. This is one way to quantify how well known the
measurement is.

What is the maximum value you measured? What is the minimum value you
measured? Divide this range into a small number of evenly spaced
intervals and create a table listing them. In the second column,
talley the number of measurements you made which had values within
each interval. Make a histogram of your data in your lab notebook by
plotting length values (maximum and minimums of each bin) along the
x-axis and the number of data points in each bin along the y-axis. In
a histogram, you can draw boxes to illustrate where bins (intervals)
start and stop and to represent how much data was present within
them. How does the distribution of your data look? Which bin had the
most data in it?  Earlier you found a best value for the length of the
block by taking the mean of your measurements. Where does this appear
on the histogram? Were more measurements longer or shorter than the
mean?  Draw a line to either side of the mean to represent the error
on the measurement that you found using the average deviation. Roughly
speaking, do most of your measurements fall within it?

Quickly measure the length of a second block. Make a guess at the
error based on your previous experience and how well you measured
it. Record your procedure, your measurement, your uncertainty, and how
you estimated it in your lab notebook. Read the section on comparing
two values in Appendix B. Do you find the lengths of the two blocks to
be the same, or different, or are you unable to determine the answer
to your satisfaction? Why?
